Reflecting on the Tragedy of Kanjuruhan

On October 1, 2022, there was a tragedy that we didn't want to witness, namely the death of 200 people, ranging from children to adults, in one place where the event was not expected. Namely at the football stadium, which should be a happy and fun place to be able to watch his favorite team play football.

But, tragedy can happen. How come? Is it because Aremania supporters who don't accept their favorite team to lose? Or did the deaths occur as a result of tear gas fired by police at a crowd of people in the stadium? But, you know that it's not the real cause. So what?

The real cause was because their lifespan was over. Why is tear gas not the real culprit? You see, the name of the cause, the effect is certain. For example, if tear gas was the real cause, then "sure" everyone in the stadium would die. But it's really not. The real cause was that his end had come. When someone dies, we can't move it forward or backward.

كل نفس ذائقة الموت

"Every soul will taste death"
(Quran, 3:185)

وَلِكُلِّ اُمَّةٍ اَجَلٌۚ فَاِذَا جَاۤءَ اَجَلُهُمْ لَا يَسْتَأْخِرُوْنَ سَاعَةً وَّلَا يَسْتَقْدِمُوْنَ

34. And every ummah has a death (time limit). When death comes, they cannot ask for a moment's delay or acceleration.
(Quran, 70:34)

So, the real cause is death that has arrived. When death comes, we cannot delay it or hasten it for even a second. Then, when we already know this reality, what should we do? Of course, we no longer need to worry about when death will come. Because, it is certain to come and when the time will come, has been determined.

Well, what we should worry about is how we die. You see, the way we die will be reckoned. If we die while trying to do good deeds, then our efforts will be worth the reward. But, when we die because of our own efforts in destroying the body, then we will sin. That's why it's wrong to say that "smoking and not smoking are both dead". Of course death is different. If we damage the body, then die because of it, then we will sin.